PRAC 1 - WSN DESCRIPTION



Understanding the Sensor Node Hardware
B)
DESCRIPTION:
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is an infrastructure-less wireless network that is deployed in a large number of wireless sensors in an ad-hoc manner that is used to monitor the system, physical or environmental conditions.
Sensor nodes are used in WSN with the onboard processor that manages and monitors the environment in a particular area. They are connected to the Base Station which acts as a processing unit in the WSN System.
Base Station in a WSN System is connected through the Internet to share data.
Wireless Sensor Networks & Mobile Communication Practical No.1
C)
NETWORK TOPOLOGY, CONFIGURATIONS AND OUTPUT:
Hardware of WSN:
1. Sensors:
Sensors in WSN are used to capture the environmental variables and which is used for data acquisition. Sensor signals are converted into electrical signals.
These components are responsible for data acquisition, i.e., they collect environmental data (variables) and convert it into electrical signals through a process known as transduction. In lay terms, sensors are tiny electric noses, ears, and fingers that 'feel' the environment and tell a computer what it 'senses' in a language it understands.
2. Sensor Nodes:
A sensor node is a combination of different subunits and all they help to perform the functionality of the sensor node. Different units help to sense, record, monitor and analyze the data which is collected from physical conditions .Even though the name, a Sensor Node comprises not only the sensing component but also other important characteristics like processing of recorded data, communication with servers and storage units to store recorded data. With all these characteristics, components and enrichments, a Sensor Node takes responsibility for data collection, data correlation, and fusion of data from other sensors with its own data and network analysis.
3. Radio Nodes:
These components are equipped with a microcontroller for data processing, a transceiver for wireless communication, external memory for data storage, and a power source to remain operational. They receive the sensor's electrical signals and send this data to the WLAN access point.
4.
Wireless Access Point:
A Wireless Access Point (WAP) is a networking device that allows connecting the devices with the wired network. A Wireless Access Point (WAP) is used to create the WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network), it is commonly used in large offices and buildings which have expanded businesses.
It is easier and simpler to understand and implant the device. It can be fixed, mobile or hybrid proliferated in the 21st century. The availability, confidentiality, and integrity of the communication and network are a responsibility and to be ensured about that.
A wireless AP connects the wired networks to the wireless client. It eases access to the network for mobile users which increases productivity and reduces the infrastructure cost.
5. WLAN Access Point:
It receives the data which is sent by the Radio nodes wirelessly, generally through the internet.
6. Evaluation Software:
The data received by the WLAN Access Point is processed by a software called as Evaluation Software for presenting the report to the users for further processing of the data which can be used for processing, analysis, storage, and mining of the data.
7. Base Station:
A base station serves as a central connection point for a wireless device to communicate. It further connects the device to other networks or devices, usually through dedicated high bandwidth wire or fiber optic connections.
The base station sends commands to the sensor nodes and the sensor node perform the task by collaborating with each other. After collecting the necessary data, the sensor nodes send the data back to the base station.
A base station also acts as a gateway to other networks through the internet. After receiving the data from the sensor nodes, a base station performs simple data processing and sends the updated information to the user using internet.
If each sensor node is connected to the base station, it is known as Single-hop network architecture. Although long distance transmission is possible, the energy consumption for communication will be significantly higher than data collection and computation.
8.
Graphical User Interface:
A graphical user interface (GUI) is a digital interface in which a user interacts with graphical components such as icons, buttons, and menus.
9.
Actuators:
Actuators allow a WSN node to influence its environment, providing a feedback channel through which its decisions can be enacted. Throughout the history of computing, there has been a trend for the ratio of processing elements to people to increase, resulting in the creation and popularization of new usage paradigms
